Upgrade without registry enhancement (#1432)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/update/upgrade-without-registry.md

kind of media (USB stick, for example) that will be delivered to the technicians.

1. The technicians receive copies of the upgrade package.

1. The technician goes to the cluster location and uses the upgrade package, documentation and tools
to perform the upgrade. This step is potentially repeated multiple times for multiple clusters.

Note that the upgrade package should not be specific for a particular cluster, only for the
OpenShift architecture and version. Technicians should be able to use that package for any cluster
with that architecture and version.

### API Extensions

None.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The proposed solution is based on copying all the required images to all the nodes of the cluster
before starting the upgrade, and ensuring that no component requires access to a registry server
during the upgrade. For this to work the following changes are required:

1. No OpenShift component used during the upgrade should use the `Always` pull policy, as that
forces the kubelet and CRI-O to try to contact the registry server even if the image is already
available.

> 1. No OpenShift component should garbage collect the upgrade images before or during the upgrade.

Reviewer: This is  typically started by the kubelet instructing CRI-O to remove images.

Author: Done.

> 1. The machine config operator should tolerate the changes that will be required to the CRI-O

Reviewer: We should be specific about the  changes here.

Author: Done.

configuration during the upgrade.

1. The engineer working in the partner's factory needs a supported and documented procedure to
create the upgrade package.

1. The technician needs a documented and supported procedure to verify that the upgrade requirements
are met (right version, enough space available, etc) and then to actually perform the upgrade.

#### Don't use the `Always` pull policy during the upgrade

Some OCP core components currently use the `Always` image pull policy during the upgrade. As a
result, the kubelet and CRI-O will try to contact the registry server even if the image is already
available in the local storage of the cluster. This blocks the upgrade.

Most OCP core components have been changed in the past to avoid this. Recently the OVN pre-puller
has also been changed (see this [bug](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-13219) for details).
To prevent bugs like this from happening in the future and make the solution less fragile we should
have a test that gates the OpenShift release and that verifies that the upgrade can be performed

> without a registry server.

Reviewer: One way to ensure this is to have an admission hook that rejects/warns any spec with `Always` and run in CI to catch it.

Author: Done.

It would also be useful to have another test that scans for use of this `Always` pull policy.

#### Don't garbage collect images required for the upgrade

Starting with version 4.14 of OpenShift CRI-O will have the capability to pin certain images (see
[this](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/6862) pull request for details). That capability will be
used to temporarily pin all the images required for the upgrade, so that they aren't garbage
collected by kubelet and CRI-O.

Note that pinning images means that kubelet and CRI-O will not remove them, even if they aren't in

> use. It is very important to make sure that there is enough available space for these images, as

Reviewer: The space should be enough to accomodate two releases (current running + candidate for install)  as well as workload images and buffer.

Author: Done.

needs to be done as root.

The technician will change the configuration of CRI-O to use `/var/lib/upgrade` as an additional
image store and to pin the release images. Inside `/etc/containers/storage.conf`:

```toml
additionalimagestores = [
  /var/lib/upgrade/4.12.10/images
]
```

Inside `/etc/crio/crio.conf.d/pin-upgrade.conf`:

```toml
pinned_images=[
  quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:*
]
```

The technician will then trigger the upgrade, adding the following to the cluster version object:

```
# oc edit clusterversion
```

```yaml
desiredUpdate:
  image: quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:0398462b1c54758fe83619022a98bbe65f6deed71663b6665224d3ba36e43f03
  version: 4.12.10
```

### Risks and Mitigations

The proposed solution will require space to store all the release images in all the nodes of the
cluster, approximately 48 GiB in the worst case. It will be necessary to calculate those space
requirements in advance and ensure (via documentation or tooling) that the upgrade isn't attempted
if the requirements aren't met.

### Drawbacks

The procedure to perform the upgrade is complicated and needs to be repeated in all the nodes of the

> cluster. Should we provide a tool automating that?

Reviewer: Yes :) This is likely to be fragile if done by hand on many nodes.

## Design Details

### Open Questions

None.

### Test Plan

We should have at least tests that verifies that the upgrade can be performed in a fully
disconnected environment, both for a single node cluster and a cluster with multiple nodes. These
tests should gate the OCP release.

> It is desirable to have another test that scans the OCP components looking for use of the `Always`

Reviewer: We should consider adding admission in CI for this.

Author: Done-

These clusters are usually installed at the customer site by a partner engineer collaborating with a
customer technician.

Eventually, the cluster will need to be upgraded, and then the technician will need a supported and
documented procedure to do it.

### User stories

#### Prepare an upgrade package

As an engineer working in a partner's factory, I want to be able to assemble the upgrade package
that will be delivered to the technicians that will perform the upgrade on-site.

#### Upgrade a single-node cluster

As a technician, I want to be able to upgrade a single node cluster using the upgrade package and
without requiring/deploying an image registry server neither in the cluster itself nor externally.

#### Upgrade a multi-node cluster

As a technician, I want to be able to upgrade a multi-node cluster using the upgrade package and
without requiring/deploying an image registry server neither on the cluster itself nor externally.

### Goals

Provide a documented and supported mechanism that technicians can use to upgrade a cluster without
requiring a registry server. This upgrade will include the OpenShift core components as well as

> additional applications provided by the partner.

Reviewer 2: For the sake of this enhancement I think it is enough to mention only the OpenShift core components.

### Non-Goals

It is not a goal to not require a registry server for other operations. For example, installing a
new workload will still require a registry server.

It is not a goal to provide a tool to automate the procedures to prepare the upgrade package or to

> perform the upgrade.

Reviewer 2: We can add "Such an automation will be part of a future enhancement".

- https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-13219
- https://github.com/openshift/cluster-network-operator/pull/1803
replaces: []
superseded-by: []
---

# Upgrade without registry

## Summary

Provide an automated mechanism to upgrade a cluster without requiring an image
registry server, and without requiring OpenShift knowledge for the technicians
performing the upgrades.

## Motivation

All these stories are in the context of disconnected clusters with limited
resources, both in the cluster itself and in the surrounding environment:

- The cluster is not connected to the Internet, or the bandwidth is very limited.
- It isn't possible to bring up additional machines, even temporarily.
- The resources of the cluster are limited, in particular in terms of CPU and memory.
- The technicians responsible for performing the upgrade have little or no OpenShift knowledge.

These clusters are usually installed at the customer site by a partner engineer
collaborating with customer technicians.

Eventually, the cluster will need to be upgraded, and then the technicians will
need tools that make the process as simple as possible, ideally requiring no

> OpenShift knowledge.

Author: We are trying to make possible for a technician without any OpenShift knowledge to start the update: she receives a USB stick, plugs it into one of the nodes of the cluster and the rest is automatic. It isn't simple, but we believe it is doable.

I can't justify this in terms of cost, because cost reduction hasn't been our main objective. I acknowledge that at the end of the day everything is a matter of cost, but that was not the main driver here. The main driver was making updates simple where currently they are very inconvenient.

> OpenShift knowledge.

Reviewer 3: It also adds to the point that if update goes wrong then can the technician would be able to collect must-gather or can perform some steps if the workaround for the issue exists.

documentation. I can't bring up any additional infrastructure at the cluster
site, in particular I can't bring up an image registry server, neither outside
of the cluster nor inside. I want to plug the USB stick provided by the
engineer in one of the nodes of the cluster and have the rest of the process
performed automatically.

### Goals

Provide an automated and documented mechanism that engineers managing a cluster
can use to pin and pre-load images in order to upgrade a cluster without
requiring a registry server.

### Non-Goals

It is not a goal to not require a registry server for other operations. For
example, installing a new workload will still require a registry server.

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

For all kinds of clusters, connected or disconnected, with or without an
available registry server:

1. The administrator of a cluster uses the OpenShift API to request an upgrade.

1. The upgrade infrastructure of the cluster ensures that all the images
required for the upgrade are pinned and pre-loaded in all the nodes of the
cluster.

In addition, for the cases were the cluster is completely disconnected or it
isn't possible to use a registry server:

> 1. An engineer uses the `oc adm upgrade create bundle ...` tool described in

Author: Yes, we explored multiple alternatives, starting with `oc-mirror` see https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MGMT-13733 for details. We concluded that the best alternative was a dump of a `docker/distribution` registry server. The reasons are explained in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1432/files#diff-11d3ede5653445cfe3c22eb3303ba55136037797ff2127f4914694f099b6e4c1R346. But I think we should consider that an implementation detail, I am not against using `oc-mirror`.

> 1. An engineer uses the `oc adm upgrade create bundle ...` tool described in

Reviewer 4: No more new tools please.

> 1. An engineer uses the `oc adm upgrade create bundle ...` tool described in

Reviewer 4: Also, if we want to use the in cluster registry as a source for images, they will use oc mirror, right?

> 1. An engineer uses the `oc adm upgrade create bundle ...` tool described in

Author: There is no in cluster registry in general. The OpenShift internal image registry is [removed when there isn't object storage available](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/registry/configuring-registry-operator.html#registry-removed_configuring-registry-operator), which means it is removed by default from bare metal clusters. In addition it doesn't work smoothly with `oc-mirror` (see [here](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MGMT-13733?focusedId=22136578&page=com.atlassian.jira.plugin.system.issuetabpanels:comment-tabpanel#comment-22136578)).

> 1. An engineer uses the `oc adm upgrade create bundle ...` tool described in

Reviewer 4: I know it's removed, but we can define that it's a prerequisite for that flow. It can be quay instead, whatever.

this enhancement to prepare the upgrade bundle containing all the artifacts
(container images and metadata) that are required to perform the upgrade plus
the images required for the custom workloads, and writes it to a USB stick (or
any other suitable media) that will be handed over to the technicians
responsible for performing the upgrades, together with documentation explaining
how to use it.

1. The technicians receive copies of the USB stick and the corresponding
documentation.

1. The technician goes to the cluster site and uses the upgrade bundle inside
the to perform the upgrade. The documentation will ask the technician to

> plug the USB stick in one of the nodes of the cluster and provide simple

Author: That would require the technician to know how to identify a control plane node, which goes against the principle of making things simple. Can you elaborate on your concern about the user experience?

> plug the USB stick in one of the nodes of the cluster and provide simple

Reviewer 3: OCP in general trying to separate control plane nodes and worker nodes. we want to communicate that updating the control plane is separate than updating worker nodes (e.g. in HyperShift). This seems to be an anti-pattern.

does so in order refresh catalog images that are specified with a tag. But it
also does it when it pulls catalog images that are specified with a digest. That
should be changed to use the `IfNotPresent` pull policy for catalog images that
are specified by digest.

Most OCP core components have been changed in the past to avoid this use of the
`Always` pull policy. Recently the OVN pre-puller has also been changed (see
this [bug](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-13219) for details). To
prevent bugs like this happening in the future and make the solution less
fragile we should have a test that gates the OpenShift release and that
verifies that the upgrade can be performed without a registry server. One way
to ensure this is to run in CI an admission hook that rejects/warns about any spec
that uses the `Always` pull policy.

It would also be useful to have another test that scans for use of this `Always`
pull policy in the source code.

We can control the image pull policy for the OCP payload, but not for
customer-specific images. The OCP upgrade may succeed, but the overall upgrade
process will still be seen as failed from the customer point of view. For

> example, in the OpenShift applicen use case both the cluster and the customer

Author: Done.

workloads are installed using a temporary registry server that is shutdown after
the installation is complete. If any of those workloads uses the `Always` pull
policy then the OCP upgrade would suceed, but the customer workloads will not
be able to start after the upgrade. To mitagate that risk the upgrade mechanism
will check if there are pods using the `Always` pull policy, and will emit a

> warning if there are any.

Author: We can assume that the cluster is disconnected when the customer has decided to use a bundle to update it. I will try to clarify that.

    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    ...
```

When the new `pinnedImages` field is added or changed the machine config
operator will need to pre-load those images (with the equivalent of `crictl
pull`), create or update the corresponding
`/etc/crio/crio.conf.d/pin-upgrade.conf` file and ask CRI-O reload its
configuration (with the equivalent of `systemctl reload crio.service`).

If the `spec.containerRuntimeConfig.imagesDirectory` field is used then it
should contain a dump of a
[docker/distribution](https://github.com/distribution/distribution) registry
server. The machine config operator will first check if there is enough space
available in the node to copy the images to the `/var/lib/containers/storage`
directory. Images in the dump of a registry server are compressed, but in
`/var/lib/containers/storage` they are not, so the machine config operator will
check that there is at least twice the space space used by the registry server
dump. If there is not enough space it will be reported as an error conditions in
the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object.

If there is enough space then the machine config operator will start a

> temporary embedded image registry server in each node of the cluster, listening

Author: I think MCO doesn't currently embed an image registry. In the approach that we are suggesting MCO itself doesn't need to embed a registry, only the `bundle-loader` component needs. It is an implementation detail, but I think that `bundle-loader` should live in the MCO repository. So yes, MCO would need to be changed to embed a registry server. This is how we did it in the prototype:

https://github.com/jhernand/upgrade-tool/blob/main/internal/registry.go

> temporary embedded image registry server in each node of the cluster, listening

Reviewer 5: No, the MCO doesn't currently embed a registry . We did talk about embedding a small one [when we were working on in-cluster builds](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MCO-571) as a place to store our images, and it would be nice to have if we could also use it for that, but we didn't have the cycles at the time to make it highly available (we'd need to keep instances in sync across the control plane) or coordinate its presence during bootstrap. 

Is there a reason why you want to spin up that image registry on *every* node in the cluster, rather than just spin up a central instance/a deployment spanning some nodes and have CRI-O on the nodes pull from that to cache/pin? 

I mean, ideally for the MCO this would probably be at least two decoupled "general case" components -- e.g.:
1.  "Thing that serves up a small registry instance that images can be batch loaded into (either from a bundle or otherwise)" which the MCO might also be able to use for caching built/layered OS images 
2. "Thing that pins a list of images (from any source) to CRI-O on some list of nodes" which we could use in any case where connectivity between that small registry (or any registry) and the node is in doubt?

spec:
  containerRuntimeConfig:
    pinnedImages:
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    ...
```

Once those images are pinned and pre-loaded the upgrade will proceed as usual.

Note that this process will by default work using whatever registry servers are
configured in the cluster. When it isn't possible to use a registry server, the
administrator of the cluster will explicitly configure the cluster version
operator to use an upgrade bundle instead, setting the new
`spec.desiredUpdate.imageSource.sourceType` field to `Bundle` (the default will
be `Registry`):

```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: ClusterVersion
metadata:
  name: version
spec:
  desiredUpdate:
    imageSource:
      sourceType: Bundle
```

The technician that performs the upgrade will receive the USB stick containing
the upgrade bundle and will plug it in one of the nodes of the cluster.

The cluster version operator will be monitoring device events in all the nodes
of the cluster in order to detect when such an USB stick (or any other kind of

> media containing an upgrade bundle) has been plugged. To control that a new

Reviewer 3: CVO only runs in the control plane. So it wont be able to detect the USB if it is plugged in to the worker node.

Author: We are suggesting to run a `bundle-monitor` daemon set for this purpose.

  desiredUpdate:
    imageSource:
      sourceType: Bundle
      bundle:
        detectionMechanism:
          mechanismType: Automatic
```

For situations where it isn't desirable to monitor device events, or it isn't
possible to plug the USB stick or any other kind of media, we will also add a
new `spec.desiredUpdate.imageSource.bundle.file` field to explicitly indicate
the location of the bundle. When this is used the value will be directly copied
to `status.desired.bundle.file` without creating the `bundle-monitor` daemon
set.

If the administrator wants to disable automatic detection of the upgrade bundle,
and wants to manually copy the file to one of the cluster nodes she will do
something like this:

```yaml
spec:
  desiredUpdate:
    imageSource:
      sourceType: Bundle
      bundle:
        detectionMechanism: Manual
        manual:
          file: /root/upgrade-4.13.7-x86_64.tar
```

If the administrator wants to disable automatic detection, but wants to use a
USB stick anyhow he will do something like this:

```yaml
spec:
  desiredUpdate:
    imageSource:
      sourceType: bundle
      bundle:
        detectionMechanism: Manual
        manual:
          file: /dev/sdb

> ```

Reviewer 3: In the first phase of the feature we should only go with the manual detection mechanism and later we should think about making it automatic

Author: Actually we are suggesting a first phase (dev preview -> tech preview) that will only support pre-loading and pinning of the images, without the bundle. The use of the bundle would then be added in the second phase (tech preview -> GA). See the graduation criteria for details. It makes sense to implement automatic detection later. I will add a `After GA` section to the graduation criteria, let me know if that works.

When the `status.desired.bundle.file` field has been populated the cluster
version operator will start to replicate the bundle to the rest of the nodes of
the cluster. To do so it will first disable auto-scaling to ensure that no new
nodes are added to the cluster while this process is in progress. Then it will

> start a new `bundle-server` daemon set. Each of the pods in this daemon set

Reviewer 3: Any technical behind why auto scaling needs to be disabled. The current CVO design is orthogonal to autoscaling AFAIK

Author: The reason for this is to prevent addition of new nodes while the images are being pre-loaded. If a new node was added after pre-loading the images but before starting the upgrade then that node would not have the required images, and would fail to upgrade.

process performed automatically, included the propagation of the bundle contents
to all the nodes.

#### Pre-load upgrade images

As an engineer managing a cluster that has a low bandwidth and/or unreliable
connection to an image registry server I want to pre-load all the images
required for the upgrade so that when I decide to actually perform the upgrade
there will be no need to contact that slow and/or unreliable registry server.

### Goals

Provide an automated and documented mechanism that partner engineers customer
technicians can use to upgrade a cluster without requiring a registry server.

### Non-Goals

It is not a goal to not require a registry server for other operations. For
example, installing a new workload will still require a registry server.

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

1. An engineer working in a partner's factory is asked to prepare a bundle to
upgrade a set of clusters to a specific OpenShift version.

1. The engineer uses the `oc adm upgrade create bundle ...` tool described in
this enhancement to prepare the upgrade bundle containing all the artifacts
(container images and metadata) that are required to perform the upgrade, and

> writes it USB stick (or any other suitable media) that will be handed over to

Reviewer 2: writes it **to a** USB stick

Author: Done.

the technicians responsible for performing the upgrades, together with
documentation explaining how to use it.

1. The technicians receive copies of the USB stick and the corresponding
documentation.

1. The technician goes to the cluster site and uses the upgrade bundle inside
the USB stick to perform the upgrade. The documentation included in the bundle
will basically ask the technician to plug the USB stick in one of the nodes of
the cluster and then provide simple instructions to verify that the upgraded has
been applied correctly. This step is potentially repeated multiple times by the
same technician for multiple clusters using the same USB stick or copies of it.

Note that the upgrade bundle should not be specific for a particular cluster,
only for the OpenShift architecture and version. Technicians should be able to
use that package for any cluster with that architecture and version.

> 

Reviewer 2: Please also speak about the need to include partner images in that upgrade bundle.

Author: This is already mentioned in the "Include custom images in the bundle" user story, and in the section that describes the `oc adm upgrade create bundle` command. I added a reference here.

### API Extensions

There are no new object kinds introduced by this enhancement, but new fields
will be added to existing `ClusterVersion` and `ContainerRuntimeConfig` objects.
Those fields are described in detail in the implementation details section below,
this is a summary of those new `CluserVersion` fields:

```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: ClusterVersion
metadata:
  name: version
spec:
  desiredUpdate:

    # Indicates if the upgrade should be performed inmediately or if it should

>     # be held for a later time. The default is `true` which means that the

Author: You are right, fixed it.

    # upgrade will be performed inmediately (once the images are pre-loaded, if
    # so requested).
    hold: true|false

    bundle:
      # Indicates if use of a bundle is enabled. The default is `true`. If
      # set to `false` then the `desiredUpdate.image` or `desiredUpdate.version`
      # field will need to be populated. The cluster version operator will then
      # pre-load the release images from the registry servers configured in the
      # cluster and will not use or require a bundle.
      enabled: true|false

      # Indicates if the cluster version operator should monitor devices
      # to automatically detect when an upgrade bundle is available. The
      # defaut is `false`.
      monitor: true|false

      # Indicates the location of the upgrade bundle when `monitor` is `false`.
      file: /root/m-bundle.tar # Can be a file.

>       file: /dev/sdb # Or a device.

Author: Yes, I forgot to add that, done.

      # This is an optional digest of the bundle. If set then the cluster version
      # operator will ensure that the bundle is used only if it matches this
      # digest. This is intended to prevent use of a wrong USB stick, or use of
      # a perfectly fine USB stick in the wrong cluster.
      digest: sha256:....

status:
  desired:
    bundle:
      # Location of the upgrade bundle. This is populated by the monitor, if
      # enabled, or copied from the `spec.desiredUpdate.bundle.file` field if
      # monitoring is disabled.
      file: /root/my-bunde.tar # Can be a file.
      file: /dev/sdb # Or a device.

      # Contains the current status of the bundle processing in each node
      # of the cluster. Keys are the node names.
      nodes:
        node0:
          # Indicates if the upgrade bundle has already been extracted to
          # the `/var/lib/upgrade/4.13.7-x86_64` directory.
          extracted: true|false

>           # Indicates if the images from the upgrade bundle have beel already

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
          # Indicates if the images from the upgrade bundle have been already
```

Author: Done.

    #
    # pinned_images = [
    #   "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...",
    #   "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
    #   "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
    #   ...
    # ]
    #
    # The CRI-O service will be reloaded when this is changed.
    pinnedImages:
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    ...
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The proposed solution is based on copying all the required images to all the
nodes of the cluster before starting the upgrade, and ensuring that no component
requires access to a registry server during the upgrade. For this to work the
following changes are required:

1. No OpenShift component used during the upgrade should use the `Always` pull
policy, as that forces the kubelet and CRI-O to try to contact the registry
server even if the image is already available.

1. No OpenShift component should garbage collect the upgrade images before or

> during the upgrade. This is typically started by the kubelet instruction CIR-O

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
during the upgrade. This is typically started by the kubelet instructing CRI-O
```

Author: Done.

to remove images.

1. No OpenShift component should explicitly try to contact the registry server
without a fallback alternative.

1. The engineer working in the partner's factory needs a `oc adm upgrade create
bundle` tool to create the upgrade bundle.

1. The technician needs documentation explaining how to use the upgrade bundle to
perform the upgrade.

1. The machine config operator should understand and support the changes that
will be required to the CRI-O configuration during the upgrade.

1. The cluster version operator needs to orchestrate the upgrade process.

> 

Reviewer 2: Also need to mention the need not to add/remove nodes while upgrading.

Author: In the "CVO will need to orchestrate the upgrade" we say this:

> To do so it will first disable auto-scaling to ensure that no new nodes
> are added to the cluster while this process is progress

Is that enough?

---
title: upgrade-without-registry
authors:
- "@jhernand"
reviewers:
- "@avishayt"
- "@danielerez"
- "@mrunalp"
- "@nmagnezi"
- "@oourfali"
approvers:
- "@sdodson"
- "@zaneb"
- "@LalatenduMohanty"
api-approvers:
- "@sdodson"
- "@zaneb"
- "@deads2k"
- "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2023-06-29
last-updated: 2023-07-26
tracking-link:
- https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-4482
see-also:
- https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1548
- https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/pull/3839
- https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-13219
- https://github.com/openshift/cluster-network-operator/pull/1803
replaces: []
superseded-by: []
---

# Upgrade without registry

## Summary

Provide an automated mechanism to upgrade a cluster without requiring an image
registry server, and without requiring OpenShift knowledge for the technicians

> performing the upgrades.

Author: Done.

As an engineer managing a cluster I want to be able to assemble an upgrade
bundle that contains all the artifacts (container images and metadata) needed
to upgrade the OpenShift cluster and my own applications. I want to hand over
this upgrade bundle and the documentation explaining how to use it to the
technicians that will perform the upgrade in a suitable media, for example a
USB stick.

#### Include custom images in the upgrade bundle

As an engineer managing a cluster I want to be able to include in the upgrade
bundle the images required to upgrade my own workloads.

#### Explicitly allow vetted upgrade bundle

As an engineer managing a cluster I want be able to explicitly approve the use
of an upgrade bundle, so that only the bundle that I tested and vetted will be
applied to the cluster.

#### Upgrade a single-node or multi-node clusters using a bundle

As a technician with little or no OpenShift knowledge I want to be able to
upgrade a single-node or multi-node cluster using the upgrade bundle and its
documentation. I can't bring up any additional infrastructure at the cluster
site, in particular I can't bring up an image registry server, neither outside

> of the cluster nor inside. I want to plug the USB stick provided by the

Author: Starting a registry server inside single-node clusters is unacceptable because it introduces a chicken-egg problem if the registry server is a workload managed by the cluster.

For multi-node clusters an image registry server supported by Red Hat inside the cluster is unacceptable (that means full Quay) because it requires a large amount of resources (specially storage, requires ODF) and additional subscriptions. We have confirmed that the proposed mechanism is better in these regards: it doesn't need additional disks, it doesn't require a full Quay instance and doesn't require storage or registry workloads running after the upgrade has completed.

> of the cluster nor inside. I want to plug the USB stick provided by the

Reviewer 7: Quay supports a use case very similar to this: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/installing/disconnected_install/installing-mirroring-creating-registry.html

> of the cluster nor inside. I want to plug the USB stick provided by the

Author: Yes, but that is only supported in an external machine, not inside the cluster. In the context that we are trying to cover we can't ask the customer to bring up an additional machine for that mirror registry.

> of the cluster nor inside. I want to plug the USB stick provided by the

Reviewer 8: But the cluster is HA and has protections against workloads becoming non HA. Would local storage operator with the registry configured to use file based storage not work? Even ephemeral storage seems like it could be made to work with an init container that mirrored content from its peer. The image to run the registry itself would need to be pinned.

> of the cluster nor inside. I want to plug the USB stick provided by the

Author: The local storage operator requires an additional disk, and we can't guarantee that will be available in this context. Single-node clusters in particular often have only one disk.

What you describe is very close to our bundle approach. We use ephemeral storage: a temporary directory created from the bundle contents. We mirror content from peers: copy the bundle from peers. The registry server code is kind of pinned: it is part of CVO (or MCO, that is an implementation detail). In addition it only consumes resources during the upgrade, after that it goes away.

> of the cluster nor inside. I want to plug the USB stick provided by the

Reviewer 9: > But the cluster is HA...

The local cluster is not actually highly available, because we have to deliver [RFE-4482][1]'s :

> I have a multi-node cluster that could have a complete power outage, and I want it to recover smoothly from that kind of disruption, despite the lack of access to image registries, local or remote.

For example, [powering on the cluster after reaching the user-site][3].  I [still][2] think we want to call that out in the use-case section of this enhancement, because it's the only reason I see that makes the in-cluster registry an insufficient solution.

[1]: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-4482
[2]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1432#issuecomment-1712441185
[3]: https://github.com/openshift/appliance/blob/master/docs/user-guide.md#high-level-flow-overview

engineer in one of the nodes of the cluster and have the rest of the process
performed automatically.

### Goals

Provide an automated and documented mechanism that engineers managing a cluster
can use to pin and pre-load images in order to upgrade a cluster without
requiring a registry server.

### Non-Goals

It is not a goal to not require a registry server for other operations. For

> example, installing a new workload will still require a registry server.

Author: Using a registry server to deploy new workloads to the cluster is a choice of the customer. We do not want to interfere with that. What we want is to give customer the option of upgrading the existing workloads (that they probably installed with the appliance, so without an off cluster registry server) without a registry server.

> example, installing a new workload will still require a registry server.

Reviewer 8: Sure, this should not preclude use of an external registry for new workload, but it seems very arbitrary to say that you can upgrade existing workloads via this method but not install new workloads via this method. How is that different?

Maybe the gap in understanding here is my understanding of scope of the appliance, I'll go look for that but if you have a reference that'd be great.

> example, installing a new workload will still require a registry server.

Author: There are two separate mechanisms proposed here:

1. The capability to pin and pre-load images.
2. The upgrade bundle.

The first one, pin and pre-load images, can be universally useful and supportable, not just for upgrades but also for new workloads. But the second one is very specific for upgrades, I don't see how can we make it useful and supportable for installing new workloads.

@danielerez @nmagnezi can you point @sdodson to the appliance documentation?

> example, installing a new workload will still require a registry server.

Reviewer 10: Sure, that's the appliance user-guide: https://github.com/openshift/appliance/blob/master/docs/user-guide.md

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

For all kinds of clusters, connected or disconnected, with or without an
available registry server:

1. The administrator of a cluster uses the OpenShift API to request an upgrade.

1. The upgrade infrastructure of the cluster ensures that all the images
required for the upgrade are pinned and pre-loaded in all the nodes of the

> cluster.

Reviewer 11: at what point do these images get unpinned?  presumably we don't want to keep them around forever, so is there a plan to remove the N-1 images from the previous upgrade, or something along those lines?  (or at least unpin them so GC can remove them as needed)

Reviewer 11: can you update the EP to state this?

presumably "pinned til the next upgrade" means "until the next upgrade is complete" (so we can be sure nothing is referencing the previous SHAs)

    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    ...
```

When the new `pinnedImages` field is added or changed the machine config
operator will need to pre-load those images (with the equivalent of `crictl
pull`), create or update the corresponding
`/etc/crio/crio.conf.d/pin-upgrade.conf` file and ask CRI-O reload its
configuration (with the equivalent of `systemctl reload crio.service`).

If the `spec.containerRuntimeConfig.imagesDirectory` field is used then it
should contain a dump of a
[docker/distribution](https://github.com/distribution/distribution) registry
server. The machine config operator will first check if there is enough space
available in the node to copy the images to the `/var/lib/containers/storage`
directory. Images in the dump of a registry server are compressed, but in
`/var/lib/containers/storage` they are not, so the machine config operator will
check that there is at least twice the space space used by the registry server
dump. If there is not enough space it will be reported as an error conditions in
the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object.

> If there is enough space then the machine config operator will start a

Author: Disk space. If there is not enough disk space the error will be reported in a condition and the upgrade aborted.

> If there is enough space then the machine config operator will start a

Reviewer 4: hmm I dont think we're running any registry here tbh. @jhernand, did I miss anything?

> If there is enough space then the machine config operator will start a

Author: We run a temporary registry server to read from the bundle and copy the images to the container storage of the node. Note that this is only needed when using a bundle; it isn't needed when only pre-loading and pinning the images.

> If there is enough space then the machine config operator will start a

Reviewer 11: > Disk space. If there is not enough disk space the error will be reported in a condition and the upgrade aborted.

can you make sure the EP states these things?

will also start a new `bundle-extractor` batch job in each node of the cluster.
Each pod in these jobs will try to read the bundle file from the location
specified in `status.desired.bundle.file`. If that file doesn't exist it will
try to download it from the HTTP server of one of the pods of the
`bundle-server` daemon set; the first that responds with `HTTP 200 Ok`. Once it
has either the file or body of the HTTP response it will extract the contents
of the `metadata.json` file (will always be the first entry of the tarball) to
check that there is space in `/var/lib/upgrade` for the size indicated in the
`size` field. If there is not enough space then it will be reported as en error
condition in the `ClusterVersion` object and the upgrade process will be
aborted.

If the `spec.desiredUpdate.imageSource.bundle.digest` field has been set then
the `bundle-extractor` will calculate the digest of the bundle, and if it
doesn't match it will report it as an error condition in the `ClusterVersion`
object and the upgrade process will be aborted.

If there is enough space the `bundle-extractor` will extract the contents of

> the bundle to the `/var/lib/upgrade/4.13.7-x86_64` directory.

Author: The error will reported in a condition and the upgrade will be aborted.

> the bundle to the `/var/lib/upgrade/4.13.7-x86_64` directory.

Reviewer 11: > The error will reported in a condition and the upgrade will be aborted.

please update the EP to state this

considerations that apply to the cluster version operator in general will also
apply in this case.

### Version Skew Strategy

This feature will only be usable once the cluster version operator and the
machine config operator have been upgraded to support it. That upgrade will have
to be done by other means.

For subsequent upgrades we will ensure that the cluster version operator can
work with both the old and the new version of the machine config operator.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

Not applicable, there are no API extensions.

#### Failure Modes

#### Support Procedures

## Implementation History

There is an initial prototype exploring some of the implementation details
described here in this [https://github.com/jhernand/upgrade-tool](repository).

## Alternatives

The alternative to this is to make a registry server available, either outside
or inside the cluster.

An external registry server is the currently supported solution for upgrades in
disconnected environments. It doesn't require any change, but it is not
feasible in most of the target environments due to the resource limitations

> described in the [motivation](#motivation) section of this document.

Reviewer 11: in particular I assume this is referring to this:
https://cloud.redhat.com/blog/introducing-mirror-registry-for-red-hat-openshift

you might reference it.

Author: Yes, I am referring to that, added a link.

An internal registry server, running in the cluster itself, is a feasible

> alternative for clusters with multiple nodes. The registry server supported by

Reviewer 11: maybe.  the orchestration of this as the registry moves between nodes during reboots, and how it pulls its own image, seem like questions that would need to be answered for a self-hosted registry solution.

Author: In a multi-node scenario that internal registry is a highly available service. That guarantees that it will be able to pull its own image from another node. We tested that with a regular Quay instance, and works correctly.

---
title: upgrade-without-registry
authors:
- "@jhernand"
reviewers:
- "@avishayt"
- "@danielerez"
- "@mrunalp"
- "@nmagnezi"

> - "@oourfali"

Reviewer 12: Given the number of CVO changes proposed, we should have someone from the OTA team look at this, too. 

cc @LalatenduMohanty

Reviewer 3: @jhernand can you add me to approver's list?

Author: Yes, will be in the next version of the PR.

approvers:
- "@sdodson"
- "@zaneb"

> api-approvers:

Reviewer 12: Either @deads2k or @JoelSpeed need to be listed as the API reviewer.

Author: Added both.

- "@sdodson"
- "@zaneb"
creation-date: 2023-06-29
last-updated: 2023-07-26
tracking-link:
- https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-4482
see-also:
- https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-13219
- https://github.com/openshift/cluster-network-operator/pull/1803
replaces: []
superseded-by: []
---

# Upgrade without registry

## Summary

Provide an automated mechanism to upgrade a cluster without requiring an image
registry server.

## Motivation

All these stories are in the context of disconnected clusters with limited
resources, both in the cluster itself and in the surrounding environment:

- The cluster is not connected to the Internet, or the bandwidth is very limited.
- It isn't possible to bring up additional machines, even temporarily.

> - The resources of the cluster are limited, in particular in terms of CPU and memory.

Reviewer 12: This item from the motivation seems inconsistent with the proposal. Using device monitoring on every node, daemonsets to run pods to manage the images across the cluster, and requiring space on each node for multiple copies of the images (to stage them and then to have them in the crio cache) is all going to be resource intensive.

Reviewer 6: I believe disk capacity is less of a concern, but I agree about the CPU.

Author: You are right, this process will intensely use the CPU during the process before the upgrade. But only during that time. Before or after that the only CPU consumer will be the daemon set that monitors the devices (if enabled) and that is quite light.

The main alternative to this approach is to have a registry server running inside the cluster permanently. That will consume probably a similar amount of resources during the upgrade, but needs to be there running for ever.

All these stories are in the context of disconnected clusters with limited
resources, both in the cluster itself and in the surrounding environment:

- The cluster is not connected to the Internet, or the bandwidth is very limited.
- It isn't possible to bring up additional machines, even temporarily.
- The resources of the cluster are limited, in particular in terms of CPU and memory.

> - The technicians responsible for performing the upgrade have little or no OpenShift knowledge.

Reviewer 3: These motivations does not seem right because without the registry customer can not run the workload. I think we want to separate the lifecycle events and infrastructure for OCP from the infrastructure required for workloads.

> need tools that make the process as simple as possible, ideally requiring no

Reviewer 12: This lack of knowledge will become a risk if something goes wrong with the upgrade. How will the customer deal with that situation?

Reviewer 6: The technician will definitely need to know how to gather logs, but that involves running a command or two, not real OpenShift knowledge.

Author: The technician will have the support of the engineers that prepared the upgrade bundle. When something goes wrong it will be the responsibility of that engineer to identify and solve the issue.

Author: Actually a previous comment from @bparees and also other comments, made me think that it would be better to split this into two different enhancements:

1. Pre-load and pin images.
2. Upgrade bundle.

I will do that in the next pull request. I will address your suggestion in the second enhancement.

Author: @ingvagabund the engineer is a customer or partner engineer. He is responsible for preparing the bundle, and we assume that he has OpenShift knowledge.

I'd expect the documentation to live in the OpenShift documentation site.

When something goes wrong the customer should be asked to collect the same resources/logs that we usually collect: must gather, etc.

OpenShift knowledge.

### User Stories

> #### Prepare an upgrade bundle

Reviewer 12: If users are preparing their own bundles, we have a risk of them attempting to upgrade in a way that is not supported (a missing edge, skipping too many releases, etc.). How will we handle that?

Reviewer 6: The idea is that the partner has a release team that creates an upgrade package, tests it, and passes it to the factory.  If an invalid upgrade is attempted anyway (e.g., if the technician tries to skip releases), then the upgrade shouldn't start.  I assume this is already taken care of today?

Author: I think we can mitigate this issue adding to the bundle metadata information about the requirements for the upgrade. For example, we can have the list of versions that this upgrade is applicable to. The `oc adm upgrade create bundle` command would obtain that information from Cincinatti and would include it into the bundle. The cluster version operator would check those requirements, similar to how it checks available disk space. Would that address your concern?

Reviewer 3: > For example, we can have the list of versions that this upgrade is applicable to. The oc adm upgrade create bundle command would obtain that information from Cincinatti and would include it into the bundle.

This should be a requisite for this feature. However this is not full proof as we can declare an update path as conditional update if we find upgrade blockers post release. In that case the partner needs to rebuild the bundle image.

As an engineer working in a partner's factory, I want to be able to assemble an
upgrade bundle that contains all the artifacts (container images and metadata)
needed to upgrade the OpenShift cluster and my own applications. I want to hand
over this upgrade bundle and the documentation explaining how to use it to the
technicians that will perform the upgrade in a suitable media, for example a USB
stick.

#### Include custom images in the bundle

As an engineer working in a partner's factory I want to be able to include in
the upgrade bundle custom images for workloads specific to the customer.

> #### Explicitly allow vetted upgrade bundle

Reviewer 12: Is there any requirement to handle signatures of bundles to ensure they have not been tampered with?

Reviewer 6: Partners will definitely ask for this.

Author: There is already an optional `digest` field to ensure the integrity of the bundle. This could be a signature, if required. The idea is that the engineer that administrates the cluster would set this field to the digest of the bundle that she is explicitly approving. Then, if the technician makes a mistake (uses the wrong bundle) or if the bundle has been tampered with the cluster version operator will reject it and abort the upgrade.

Note also that even without this digest (or signature) of the bundle there is still the signature of the release image itself: if the release payload has been tampered with the upgrade will be rejected. The additional digest (or signature) is intended to detect the problem earlier, as well as to protect the custom images that aren't part of the OpenShift release.

We could use a signature instead of a digest, but that would complicate things for partners because they are the ones that build the bundle, and the ones that would have to sign it. Using a signature would force them to also distribute the corresponding keys to verify that signature.

Author: We count on CVO verifying the signature, but is not enough because we also want to include customer images and metadata in the bundle: the digest covers all that.

CVO doesn't have direct access to the bundle, only the `bundle-extractor` pods running in each node have that access. These pods will check the digest on the fly, as the bundle is extracted. Once finished they report back via conditions in the `ClusterVersion` object. CVO checks these conditions.

Author: Yes, that is the idea of the digest: it covers the complete bundle, including the metadata.

I will add a paragraph explaining that the bundle should also contain the payload signatures.

site, in particular I can't bring up an image registry server, neither outside
of the cluster nor inside. I want to plug the USB stick provided by the
engineer in one of the nodes of the cluster and have the rest of the process
performed automatically.

### Goals

Provide an automated and documented mechanism that engineers managing a cluster
can use to pin and pre-load images in order to upgrade a cluster without
requiring a registry server.

### Non-Goals

It is not a goal to not require a registry server for other operations. For
example, installing a new workload will still require a registry server.

## Proposal

### Workflow Description

For all kinds of clusters, connected or disconnected, with or without an
available registry server:

1. The administrator of a cluster uses the OpenShift API to request an upgrade.

1. The upgrade infrastructure of the cluster ensures that all the images
required for the upgrade are pinned and pre-loaded in all the nodes of the
cluster. These images will be un-pinned during the next upgrade.

In addition, for the cases were the cluster is completely disconnected or it
isn't possible to use a registry server:

> 1. An engineer uses the `oc adm upgrade create bundle ...` tool described in

Author: I'd say the same team that owns CVO, as it is an specific for upgrades.

this is a summary of those new `CluserVersion` fields:

```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: ClusterVersion
metadata:
  name: version
spec:
  desiredUpdate:

    # Indicates if the upgrade should be performed immediately or if it should
    # be held for a later time. The default is `false` which means that the
    # upgrade will be performed immediately (once the images are pre-loaded, if
    # so requested).
    hold: true|false

    bundle:
      # Indicates if use of a bundle is enabled. The default is `true`. If
      # set to `false` then the `desiredUpdate.image` or `desiredUpdate.version`
      # field will need to be populated. The cluster version operator will then
      # pre-load the release images from the registry servers configured in the
      # cluster and will not use or require a bundle.
      enabled: true|false

      # Indicates if the cluster version operator should monitor devices
      # to automatically detect when an upgrade bundle is available. The
      # defaut is `false`.
      monitor: true|false

      # Indicates the location of the upgrade bundle when `monitor` is `false`.
      file: /root/m-bundle.tar # Can be a file.

>       file: /dev/sdb # Or a device.

Reviewer 12: Why do we want to support both types? Could we settle on 1?

Author: I assume the remote admin has knowledge of the hardware that is used, so it will know what will be the name of the device. If she doesn't know then she can enable monitoring which will automatically detect it.

      # This is an optional digest of the bundle. If set then the cluster version
      # operator will ensure that the bundle is used only if it matches this
      # digest. This is intended to prevent use of a wrong USB stick, or use of
      # a perfectly fine USB stick in the wrong cluster.

>       digest: sha256:....

Reviewer 12: How is this value updated before a bundle arrives at the cluster to be installed?

Author: The administrator of the cluster sets it in advance, before the technician arrives in the cluster site and plugs the USB stick.

Author: If this is a completely disconnected environment, with no remote access at all, then this is impossible. The `digest` field would need to be empty, or else the technician should be provided with instructions to do that change herself.

without a fallback alternative.

> 1. The machine config operator needs to support image pinning, pre-loading and

Reviewer 13: Do we perform image pinning only for OCP specific images or it also includes customer workload images?

Reviewer 2: It depends. But in high-level, the right approach would be:
1. Pin OCP images - for cases where the cluster is used to run customer workloads only
2. Pin OCP images and partner images - for cases where partners have an appliance (basically OCP + more infra workloads they need to run) - in this case, you'll want to have both OCP and partner images pinned. While the customer workloads aren't.

An example, Dell ships an appliance that includes OCP + powerflex storage. You'd need both OCP images and powerflex related images pinned. This setup is used by customers to run their workloads. They can host these images in a registry (in cluster) and pull those from there. But the images required for OCP + Dell software + the in-cluster registry, should be pinned so that everything is running (for reboot, upgrade, etc.).

Reviewer 13: ah got it, thanks for the explanation.

    bundle:
      # Location of the upgrade bundle. This is populated by the monitor, if
      # enabled, or copied from the `spec.desiredUpdate.bundle.file` field if
      # monitoring is disabled.
      file: /root/my-bunde.tar # Can be a file.
      file: /dev/sdb # Or a device.

      # Node where the bundle is available. This is optional. By default the
      # cluster version operator will look for the bundle in all the noes, but
      # if this is used it will look only in the given node.
      node: node2

      # Contains the current status of the bundle processing in each node
      # of the cluster. Keys are the node names.

>       nodes:

Reviewer 12: How many nodes do these clusters typically have as a max? Should we have a separate CR for each node to avoid bloating the ClusterVersion resource?

Reviewer 6: These are usually small clusters, but we shouldn't rely on that.  Can we just summarize it here?  And if we summarize it here, do we need the detailed information in many other CRs?  If that information is valuable, maybe it can be added as an annotation on the node resource.

Author: In the details below I am suggesting to keep here only the basic (and small) information: the boolean flags that control the progress. I am also suggesting to store the large pieces of that (the upgrade metadata, including the list of images) in a separate configmap for each node. That could well be a CR.

Actually in the [prototype](https://github.com/jhernand/upgrade-tool) this information is stored as node annotations, but I think it is too large for that (22 KiB approximately).

Author: There will be contention, but not a lot. Take into account that this will only be updated when the bundle is completely extracted and later when it is completely loaded. That will be two updates times the number of nodes. Do you think we should include a new CR for that?

cluster. This blocks the upgrade.

The catalog operator uses the `Always` pull policy to pull catalog images. It
does so in order refresh catalog images that are specified with a tag. But it
also does it when it pulls catalog images that are specified with a digest. That
should be changed to use the `IfNotPresent` pull policy for catalog images that
are specified by digest.

Most OCP core components have been changed in the past to avoid this use of the
`Always` pull policy. Recently the OVN pre-puller has also been changed (see
this [bug](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-13219) for details). To
prevent bugs like this happening in the future and make the solution less
fragile we should have a test that gates the OpenShift release and that
verifies that the upgrade can be performed without a registry server. One way
to ensure this is to run in CI an admission hook that rejects/warns about any spec
that uses the `Always` pull policy.

It would also be useful to have another test that scans for use of this `Always`

> pull policy in the source code.

Author: I think it helps to detect optional components that may not be even started when the other test is executed.

> pull policy in the source code.

Reviewer 8: Yeah, and it'd make it possible to have one centrally located job that ensures even if the job runs on AWS it will detect issues introduced in GCP CSI drivers or something. Good point.

We can control the image pull policy for the OCP payload, but not for
customer-specific images. The OCP upgrade may succeed, but the overall upgrade
process will still be seen as failed from the customer point of view. For
example, in the OpenShift appliance use case both the cluster and the customer
workloads are installed using a temporary registry server that is shutdown
after the installation is complete. If any of those workloads uses the `Always`
pull policy then the OCP upgrade would succeed, but the customer workloads will
not be able to start after the upgrade. To mitagate that risk when a bundle is
used the upgrade mechanism will check if there are pods using the `Always` pull

> policy, and will emit a warning if there are any.

Author: In that case the potential problem will go undetected: it isn't 100% exact, but I think it helps anyhow.

    # ]
    additionalImageStores:
    - /var/lib/my-images
    - /var/lib/my-images

    # List of pinned images. Translates into a new `pin-upgrade.conf` file inside
    # the `/etc/crio/crio.conf.d` directory with content similar to this:
    #
    # pinned_images = [
    #   "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...",
    #   "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
    #   "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
    #   ...
    # ]
    #
    # The CRI-O service will be reloaded when this is changed.
    pinnedImages:
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    ...
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> The proposed solution is based on copying all the required images to all the

Reviewer 12: What is doing the copying?

Author: When the bundle is detected the cluster version operator starts a `bundle-server` daemon that serves the bundle via HTTP (only from the node that actually has it). It also starts a `bundle-extractor` job in each node that downloads the bundle and extracts its content.

should be enough to accommodate tho releases (current running + candidate for
install) as well as workload images and buffer.

The changes to pin the images will be done in a

> `/etc/crio/crio.conf.d/pin-upgrade.conf` file, something like this:

Reviewer 7: One thing that could actually simplify things here is to make this in `/run/crio/crio.conf` - i.e. it's an explicitly *transient* state before the next boot - and the config automatically goes away after the next boot (when we've upgraded).

I think we should flesh out some more "transient MachineConfig" style flows that write to `/run`, don't reboot, and don't have config drift monitoring etc.

is aware of these changes and doesn't reboot the node. Ideally this should be
added to the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object, for example:

```yaml
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: ContainerRuntimeConfig
metadata:
  ...
spec:
  containerRuntimeConfig:
    additionalImageStores:
    - /var/lib/upgrade/4.13.7-x86_64
```

When the new `additionalImageStores` field is added or changed the machine
config operator will need to regenerate the `/etc/containers/storage.conf` file,
including the corresponding `additionalimagestores` field, and then reload it
using the equivalent of `systemctl reload crio.service`.

The changes to pin the images will be done in a
`/etc/crio/crio.conf.d/pin-upgrade.conf` file, something like this:

```toml
pinned_images=[
  "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...",
  "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
  "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
  ...
]
```

These files aren't tracked by the machine config operator, but the CRI-O service
needs to be reloaded when they are created or changed. To support that a new

> filed will be added to the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object, for example:

Reviewer 12: What creates this new resource in the cluster for each bundle?

Author: The cluster version operator.

metadata:
  name: version
spec:
  desiredUpdate:
    version: 4.14.5
```

The cluster operator will first ask the machine config operator to pin and
pre-load the release image, creating a `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object similar
to this:

```yaml
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: ContainerRuntimeConfig
metadata:
  name: pin-upgrade
spec:
  containerRuntimeConfig:
    pinnedImages:
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...
```

The machine config operator will react to that pinning and pre-loading the
image in all the nodes of the cluster, as described in the previous section.
Once the image is pinned and pre-loaded the cluster version operator will
inspect it and find out the references to the payload images. It will then also

> pin and pre-load those images, updating the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object:

Author: It seems to me that this inspection of the release image is something that belongs into CVO more than MCO. I assume CVO already does something similar today to verify signatures, for example.

> pin and pre-load those images, updating the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object:

Reviewer 8: I think the CVO should just act on the image not care about how the image got there. Certainly if the CVO is explicitly pulling the image we should fix that.

> pin and pre-load those images, updating the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object:

Reviewer 9: CVO does not pull anything, because we know that image access is fiddly.  We get access to incoming release-image manifests by launching a `version-*` pod with a shared volume, so CRI-O can go fetch the image for us, the `version-*` containers copy the manifests into the shared volume, and the outgoing CVO grabs the manifests from the shared volume to start rolling out the update.

The engineer will then need internet access and a Linux machine where she can
run `oc adm upgrade create bundle`, for example:

```bash
$ oc adm upgrade create bundle \
--arch=x86_64 \
--version=4.13.7 \
--pull-secret=/my/pull/secret.txt \
--output=/my/bundle/dir
```

The `oc adm upgrade bundle` command will find the list of image references that
make up the release, doing the equivalent of this:

```bash
$ oc adm release info \
quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release:4.13.7-x86_64 -o json | \
jq '.references.spec.tags[].from.name'
```

In addition to the release images the tool will also support explicitly adding
custom images. For example:

```bash
$ oc adm upgrade create bundle \
--arch=x86_64 \
--version=4.13.7 \
--pull-secret=/my/pull/secret.txt \

> --extra-image=quay.io/my-company/my-workload1 \

Reviewer 12: Passing a file with a list of image references would make it easier to avoid command line length limits that might result if there are a lot of images.

Author: Makes sense, added a `--extra-images-file` option.

--extra-image=quay.io/my-company/my-workload2 \
...
--output=/my/bundle/dir
```

This is intended for situations where the user wants to use the same upgrade
mechanism for her own images.

> The command will then bring up a temporary image registry server, embedded into

Reviewer 12: Why does it need to start a local registry instead of copying the files directly to disk?

Author: We explored several alternatives for this and this seems to be the best one.

A plain file copy is feasible only if the target directory is empty and nothing is using it. That is why we are suggesting to add full support to the `additionalimagestores` setting in `storage.conf`. If that was usable (via `ContainerRuntimeConfig`) then we could create such an additional directory, copy the files there and reload CRI-O. The size of the (uncompressed) bundle for this would be approximately 32 GiB, and it would be there for ever, at least till the next upgrade, because those additional directories are read only.

It is also possible to copy the images using the equivalent of `skopeo copy containers-storage:... containers-storage: ...`. That doesn't need need the permanent additional directory, and doesn't need to shutdown or reload CRI-O, but it does need those 32 GiB temporarily, while the copy is in progress.

Another possibility is to use the equivalent of `skopeo copy docker://... containers-storage:...`. That is where the temporary registry comes in place. The advantage is that the format used by the registry to store the images is more efficient: it only needs 16 GiB for a release. That reduces the size of the bundle and the space required in the node.

An improvement over that last possibility is to use the CRI-O gRPC API, the equivalent of `circtl pull ...`. It doesn't improve performance or reduces the required size, but it means that there is one less component needed (no need for `skopeo`) and reduces the risks: CRI-O will be writing the images to the disk itself, so no risk of format mismatch.

We aren't ruling out any of the above possibilities, consider them as implementation details, but we think that the last one is the better overall.

Author: Done.

The cluster version operator will be responsible for orchestrating the upgrade.

The technician will receive the USB stick containing the
`upgrade-4.13.7-x86_64.tar` file and will plug it in one of the nodes of the
cluster.

The cluster version operator will be monitoring device events in all the nodes
of the cluster in order to detect when such an USB stick (or any other kind of
media containing an upgrade bundle) has been plugged. To control that a new
`spec.desiredUpdate.bundle.monitor` field will be added to the `ClusterVersion`
object. The default value will be `false` so that this monitoring will be
disabled by default. When set to `true` the cluster version operator will create
a new `bundle-monitor` daemon set that will perform the actual monitoring. When
any of the pods in this daemon set detects a device containing a valid upgrade
bundle it will update the status of the `ClusterVersion` object indicating that
the bundle is available, via a new `status.desired.bundle.file` field.

For situations where it isn't desirable to monitor device events, or it isn't
possible to plug the USB stick or any other kind of media, we will also add a

> new `spec.desiredUpdate.bundle.file` field to explicitly indicate the location

Reviewer 12: If the technician doing the upgrade is not familiar with OpenShift, who sets this field?

Author: In this particular case, when it isn't possible to just plug the USB stick, the technician will need to know a bit more about OpenShift or have detailed instructions. Or else the administrator of the cluster will set this in advance.

metadata. To do so it will use the new `pinnedImages` and `imagesDirectory`
fields of the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object:

```yaml
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: ContainerRuntimeConfig
metadata:
  name: pin-upgrade
spec:
  containerRuntimeConfig:
    pinnedImages:
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    imagesDirectory: /var/lib/upgrade/4.13.7-x86_64
```

The machine config operator will react to that pinning and pre-loading the
images in all the nodes of the cluster, as described in the previous section.

When the all the images are pinned and pre-loaded the cluster version operator
will check the `spec.desiredUpdate.schedule.scheduleType` field of the
`ClusterVersion` object. This field will be used to indicate if the upgrade has
to be started manually later or it if should wait till the user explicitly sets
it to `Immediate`. The default value for that will be `Immediate`. This is
intended for situations where the user wishes to prepare everything for the

> upgrade in advance, but wants to perform the upgrade later.

Reviewer 3: I do not see a reason around why the update schedule needs to be part of this enhancement. We are planning introduce too many changes and some of the changes directly not related to the goal. The update schedule is a generic feature which should be a separate enhancement.

`ContainerRuntimeConfig` object:

```yaml
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: ContainerRuntimeConfig
metadata:
  name: pin-upgrade
spec:
  containerRuntimeConfig:
    pinnedImages:
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
```

This configuration will be removed once the upgrade has completed successfully.

`bundle-loader` job in each node of the cluster. The pods inside these jobs will
first check that there is enough space available in the node to load the images
into the `/var/lib/containers/storage` directory. To do so it will use the
`size` field of the `metadata.json` file. Images in the bundle are compressed,
but in `/var/lib/containers/storage` they are not, so the `bundle-loader` will
check that there is at least twice the space indicated in the `size` field. If
there is not enough space it will be reported as error conditions in the
`CluterVersion` object and the upgrade process will be aborted.

If there is enough space the `bundle-loader` pod will start a temporary embedded

> image registry server, listening in a randomly selected local port, using a self

Reviewer 12: A host port?

Author: Yes, a host port, something like `localhost:12345` where `12345` is a randomly selected free port. This will be used only for the communication between CRI-O and the temporary registry, all within a single node.

> --version=4.13.7 \

Reviewer 12: Limiting this to a version and arch as input is going to make it challenging to create bundles with hot fixes. It might be better to use an explicit image reference here, just like with other admin commands that operate on images.

been loaded for `node0` the status will look like this:

```yaml
status:
  desired:
    bundle:
      monitor: true
      file: /dev/sdb
      nodes:
        node0:
          extracted: true
          loaded: true
          metadata: '{ ... }'
        node1:
          extracted: true
          loaded: false
          metadata: '{ ... }'
        node2:
          extracted: true
          loaded: false
          metadata: '{ ... }'
```

At that point the `bundle-loader` job will finish.

When all the nodes have the bundle loaded (the `loaded` fields of all nodes is
`true`) the cluster version operator will check the new
`spec.desiredUpdate.hold` field of the `ClusterVersion` object. This field will
be used to indicate if the upgrade has to be started immediately, or if should
wait till the user explicitly sets it to `false`. The default value for that
will be `false`. This is intended for situations where the user wishes to
prepare everything for the upgrade in advance, but wants to perform the upgrade
later.

When the value of the `spec.desiredUpdate.hold` field is `false` the cluster
version operator will trigger the regular upgrade process, adding something

> like this to the `ClusterVersion` object:

Reviewer 12: Having the CVO give itself instructions like this makes me think that it might be possible to create a new operator, outside of OCP, to manage this process. Did you consider that approach?

Author: Yes, we did consider that approach. Actually that is what we did in the [prototype](https://github.com/jhernand/upgrade-tool): a regular application independent of `oc adm upgrade ...` an independent of CVO. It works, as you can see in this [demo](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1QvFA1-VsMi1CsWMuIiV_nFdA3Giz3SGd) but I believe the user experience and the supportability would be much better if it is part of OCP.

Reviewer 12: Why would it be easier to support in the CVO?

Author: It would be easier to support if it is part of OCP because it would be tested and released as part of OCP, customers will not have to open support tickets for a different product and team, and support engineers would follow the same processes that they follow for any other OCP ticket, escalating to the OCP engineering team if needed.

That doesn't mean that it needs to be part of CVO, although that looks like the natural place to me, it could be a separate operator, but still part of OCP.

delete the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object that it created to pin the images, and
will start a new `bundle-cleaner` job in each node that will clean all the
artifacts potentially left around by other pieces of the upgrade. In particular
it will remove the `/var/lib/upgrade/4.13.7-x86_64` directory created by the
`bundle-extractor`.

In order to support the situation where the user only wants to load the images
in advance but doesn't want to use a bundle, the `ClusterVersion` spec will have
a `desiredUpdate.bundle.enabled` field. The default will be `true`, but when
explicitly set to false the the cluster version operator will skip the creation
of the `bundle-server` and the `bundle-extractor` and will go directly to create
the `bundle-loader`. The `bundle-loader` will in this case skip the step to
start the embedded registry and configure it as a mirror. Instead of that it will
ask CRI-O to pull the images as usual.

### Risks and Mitigations

The proposed solution will require space to store the release bundle and all the
release images in all the nodes of the cluster, approximately 48 GiB in the
worst case. To mitigate that risks the components that will consume disk space

> will check in advance if the required space is available.

Reviewer 12: The storage requirement also includes the images for the running cluster, right?

Author: Those 48 GiB include 16 GiB required to extract the contents of the bundle to a temporary directory and the 32 GiB that the release images will take in the `/var/lib/containers/storage` directory once copied. It doesn't include the space required for the already existing images.

Note that the 16 GiB used to temporarily extract the bundle are released once the images are copied.

> 

Reviewer 12: What happens to a cluster without a registry if a pod is rescheduled from one node onto another that does not have the image needed?

Author: Before starting the upgrade the process described here ensures that all the images are copied to all the nodes. So if that pod is using one of the new images it will just work because the image will be there.

Note that this upgrade process doesn't address the problem that you describe in general: if there is a pod that uses an image that is *not* part of the bundle then the pod may or may not work, exactly the same that would happen without this upgrade process.

Reviewer 12: That's my point. We're solving a very narrow problem by focusing only on upgrades. If the cluster has no registry, any pod that needs a container image not pinned in the crio cache may fail to recover if it is rescheduled. What are we telling users to do about that? Does the upgrade process need to account for any of those special processes?

Author: You are right in that we (well, at least I) are focusing only on upgrades. Are you suggesting to convert this into a wider enhancement to install/run/upgrade OCP without a registry server?

Author: Note that we tried to make the solution generic enough that it could be used for OCP images as well as for customer images. The suggested `pinnedImages` field in the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object could be used by customers to pre-load and pin their own images.

I am not against looking at a wider context, but I think that we are suggesting would work well for upgrades and won't break other use cases (minus bugs).

nodes of the cluster before starting the upgrade, and ensuring that no component
requires access to a registry server during the upgrade. For this to work the
following changes are required:

1. No OpenShift component used during the upgrade should use the `Always` pull
policy, as that forces the kubelet and CRI-O to try to contact the registry
server even if the image is already available.

1. No OpenShift component should garbage collect the upgrade images before or
during the upgrade. This is typically started by the kubelet instructing CIR-O
to remove images.

1. No OpenShift component should explicitly try to contact the registry server
without a fallback alternative.

1. The engineer working in the partner's factory needs a `oc adm upgrade create
bundle` tool to create the upgrade bundle.

1. The technician needs documentation explaining how to use the upgrade bundle to
perform the upgrade.

1. The machine config operator should understand and support the changes that
will be required to the CRI-O configuration during the upgrade.

1. The cluster version operator needs to orchestrate the upgrade process.

> #### Don't use the `Always` pull policy during the upgrade

Reviewer 4: why is this accurate? by default, we dont really care about partners images and payload - if they dont need they images during the cluster stratup time, why would we mind whether they are pulling the images or not. If they decide to upgrade completely without a registry, than of course, but if they have an in cluster registry - it can be whatever they want policy. I would say we should even encourage them not to use pinning for those images just to be more restrictive with pinning vs kubelet gc ratio.

> #### Don't use the `Always` pull policy during the upgrade

Author: That makes sense. I have updated the document to issue a warning in this case.

images required for the upgrade, so that they aren't garbage collected by
kubelet and CRI-O.

Note that pinning images means that kubelet and CRI-O will not remove them, even
if they aren't in use. It is very important to make sure that there is enough
available space for these images, as otherwise the performance of the node may
degrade and it may stop functioning correctly if it runs out of space. The space
should be enough to accommodate tho releases (current running + candidate for
install) as well as workload images and buffer.

#### Don't try to contact the image registry server explicitly

Some OpenShift components explicitly try to contact the registry server without
a fallback alternative. These need to be changed so that they don't do it or so
that they have a fallback mechanism when the registry server isn't available.

For example, in OpenShift 4.1.13 the machine config operator runs the equivalent
of `skopeo inspect` in order to decide what kind of upgrade is in progress. That
fails if there is no registry server, even if the image has already been pulled.
That needs to be changed so that contacting the registry server is not required.

> A possible way to do that is to use the equivalent of `crictl inspect` instead.

Author: That is correct, this catalog behavior doesn't block the upgrade. I'd say that for this kind of environments we could change the catalog configuration to pull catalogs by digest. If we do that then the `Always` policy doesn't make sense, we could use `IfNotPresent`. We would loose the capability to refresh the catalog, but as the cluster is disconnected anyhow that capability is already lost. The user (or the upgrade infrastructure) would have to change that configuration manually to point to new catalogs.

---
title: upgrade-without-registry
authors:
- "@jhernand"
reviewers:
- "@avishayt"
- "@danielerez"
- "@mrunalp"
- "@nmagnezi"
- "@oourfali"
approvers:
- "@sdodson"
- "@zaneb"
api-approvers:
- "@sdodson"
- "@zaneb"
- "@deads2k"
- "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2023-06-29
last-updated: 2023-07-26
tracking-link:
- https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-4482
see-also:
- https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-13219
- https://github.com/openshift/cluster-network-operator/pull/1803
replaces: []
superseded-by: []
---

# Upgrade without registry

## Summary

Provide an automated mechanism to upgrade a cluster without requiring an image
registry server.

## Motivation

> All these stories are in the context of disconnected clusters with limited

Author: Yes, the pinning and pre-loading part is useful for connected environments as well. I reordered things to stress that. please take another look.

As an engineer managing a cluster I want be able to explicitly approve the use
of an upgrade bundle, so that only the bundle that I tested and vetted will be
applied to the cluster.

#### Upgrade a single-node cluster

As a technician with little or no OpenShift knowledge I want to be able to
upgrade a single-node cluster using the upgrade bundle and its documentation. I
can't bring up any additional infrastructure at the cluster site, in particular
I can't bring up an image registry server, neither outside of the cluster nor
inside. I want to plug the USB stick provided by the engineer in the node and
have the rest of the process performed automatically.

#### Upgrade a multi-node cluster

As a technician with little or no OpenShift knowledge I want to be able to
upgrade a multi-node cluster as well. This is the same story than for
single-node clusters but for multi-node clusters. The difference is that I don't
want to plug the USB stick to all the nodes of the cluster, instead I want to
plug it to only one of the nodes (selected randomly) and have the rest of the
process performed automatically, included the propagation of the bundle contents

> to all the nodes.

Reviewer 14: Looks like the two stories above could be really merged into one, as long as the node where the USB stick is plugged doesn't matter

...
--output=/my/bundle/dir
```

This is intended for situations where the user wants to use the same upgrade
mechanism for her own images.

The `--extra-image` option will be used to add a single image, and it can be
repeated multiple times.

The `--extra-images-file` option will be used to add a collection of images
specified in a text file, one image per line.

The command will then bring up a temporary image registry server, embedded into
the tool, listening to a randomly selected local port and using a self signed
certificate. It will then start to copy the images found in the previous step to
the embedded registry server, using the equivalent of this for each image:

```bash
$ skopeo copy \
--src-auth-file=/my/pull.secret.txt \
--dst-cert-dir=/my/certs \
docker://quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:... \
docker://localhost:12345/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@...
```

When all the images have been copied to the temporary image registry server it
will be shutdown.

The result will be a directory containing approximately 180 images and requires
16 GiB of space. The command will then create a `upgrade-4.13.7-x86_64.tar` tar

> file containing that directory and a `metadata.json` file.

Reviewer 14: What about instead using something like `oc mirror --config=imageset-config.yaml file://<some-dir>` (through the `oc-mirror` plugin) to copy the specified release version to files? It will also create a desired number of tar archives containing the release images

> The `metadata.json` file will contain additional information, in particular the

Reviewer 14: note: the `publish/.metadata.json` file (produced as one of the additional artifacts) from the `oc mirror` command contains pretty similar information

responsible for performing the upgrades, together with documentation explaining
how to use it.

1. The technicians receive copies of the USB stick and the corresponding
documentation.

1. The technician goes to the cluster site and uses the upgrade bundle inside
the to perform the upgrade. The documentation will ask the technician to
plug the USB stick in one of the nodes of the cluster and provide simple
instructions to verify that the upgraded has been applied correctly. This step
is potentially repeated multiple times by the same technician for multiple
clusters using the same USB stick or copies of it.

Note that the upgrade bundle should not be specific for a particular cluster,
only for the OpenShift architecture and version. Technicians should be able to
use that package for any cluster with that architecture and version.

### API Extensions

There are no new object kinds introduced by this enhancement, but new fields
will be added to existing `ClusterVersion` and `ContainerRuntimeConfig` objects.
Those fields are described in detail in the implementation details section below,
this is a summary of the new `CluserVersion` fields:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 15: Is every field listed here new? `DesiredUpdate` is not right?
Would you be able to convert this to go structures? It's easier to review and there are a lot of nuances that can't be picked up in YAML.

When converting to Go structures, please review https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/dev-guide/api-conventions.md

If you wish to, we can review it as a PR to the openshift/api repository as well, that may be easier for you.

CC @ingvagabund in case you're interested on taking on this API review

Author: @JoelSpeed the `DesiredUpdate` field already exists, we are adding new fields.

I went ahead and submitted draft pull requests for the suggested API changes in the machine config operator and the cluster version operator:

- https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/pull/3839
- https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1548

Those are basically copies of what I wrote in this pull request, but a bit more oriented towards users, as what I wrote here is more oriented towards developers. There is for sure room for improvement there. Let me know if you still think it is preferable to use Go syntax here as well.

Reviewer 15: I'll review the API via the openshift/api PR, as mentioned, there's a lot of nuance in APIs that can't be represented just in the YAML representation

      # of the cluster. Keys are the node names.
      nodes:
        node0:
          # Indicates if the upgrade bundle has already been extracted to
          # the `/var/lib/upgrade/4.13.7-x86_64` directory.
          extracted: true|false
          # Indicates if the images from the upgrade bundle have been already
          # copied to the `/etc/containers/storage` directory.
          loaded: true|false
          # Contains the metadata of the bundle as seen by this node. This is
          # taken from the `metadata.json` file that is part of the bundle.
          metadata: '{ ... }'
        node1: { ... }
        ...
```

And this is a summary of the new `ContainerRuntimeConfig` fields:

```yaml
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: ContainerRuntimeConfig
metadata:
  name: pin-upgrade
spec:
  containerRuntimeConfig:

    # Additional image store directories. Translates into something like this
    # inside the `/etc/containers/storage.conf` file:
    #
    # additionalimagestores = [
    #   "/var/lib/my-images/...",
    #   "/var/lib/your-images/...",
    #   ...
    # ]
    additionalImageStores:
    - /var/lib/my-images

>     - /var/lib/my-images

Reviewer 7: Also, I don't understand why we have an `additionalImageStores` at all here, isn't all we need covered by the image pinning?

>     - /var/lib/my-images

Author: The example is incorrect, should have been two different directories, I will fix that.

It is a list in order to support multiple directories like the `additionalimagestores` setting in `storage.conf` does.

With the current approach (based on using the equivalent of `crictl pull` to copy the images) this isn't necessary. It would be necessary if we change the approach and decide to just copy the files (in `containers-storage` format). I am keeping this here because it may be useful for other use cases. I can remove it if you think it is too confusing.

    # List of pinned and pre-loaded images. Translates into a new `pin-upgrade.conf`
    # file inside the `/etc/crio/crio.conf.d` directory with content similar to this:
    #
    # pinned_images = [
    #   "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...",
    #   "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
    #   "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
    #   ...
    # ]
    #
    # The CRI-O service will be reloaded when this is changed.
    #

>     # The machine config operator will ensure that these images are pre-loadd and

Reviewer 7: pre-loaded

Author: Thanks, doe.

    # in all the nodes of the cluster.

>     pinnedImages:

Reviewer 7: This doesn't seem to exist today?

Author: No, this doesn't exist today, we are suggesting to add it.

    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    ...

    # Optional directory containing the images. When this is used the machine config

>     # operator will expect it to contain a dump of a registry server, will start a

Reviewer 7: Hmmm...a lot of duplication there.  I think we should be able to synthesize the necessary backing data from the image store, and serve it as a registry, no?

Author: It guess possible to take an image from a `containers-storage` directory and serve it using the registry protocol. It wouldn't be trivial, but not impossible either. The fact that `skopeo copy containers-storage:...` works means that there is enough information in the containers storage directory to reconstruct what the registry protocol requires. Is that what you are suggesting?

But even if that works it would mean that we bundle would need to use the `container-storage` format, which requires twice the space of a registry dump.

Reviewer 7: It looks like the skopeo `dir` transport may be what we want here.

Author: I considered that, but was hesitant to use it because of this statement in the `containers-transport` manual page:

> An existing local directory path storing the manifest, layer tarballs and signatures as individual files.  This is a non-standardized format, primarily useful  for  debugging  or noninvasive container inspection.

Reviewer 7: It's not standardized, but I believe it's stable, i.e. it will not change in an incompatible way.

We can try to get that guaranteed upstream.  And also, this should be covered by CI, so if it *does* change it at least will be something we find and can fix (e.g. by vendoring an older code).

Author: Lets say that we use that `dir` format. We will still need one of the following alternatives:

1. A registry server implementation that reads from that directory, so that we can use `crictl pull` (actually the equivalent CRI-O API) to pull the images.

2. Copy the images from that directory to the containers storage directory running `skopeo copy dir:... containers-storage:...` for each image.

The only benefit I see in any of those options is that we will not be depending on the  the `docker/distribution` code. Is that what you are concerned about?

Reviewer 7: Right; it seems valuable to me to not hardcode docker/distribution; but I also wouldn't call doing so a blocker. I care more about using the registry protocol on the wire instead of inventing something new.

images.

1. No OpenShift component should explicitly try to contact the registry server
without a fallback alternative.

1. The machine config operator needs to support image pinning, pre-loading and
reloading of the CRI-O service.

1. The cluster version operator needs to orchestrate the upgrade process.

1. The engineer that prepares the upgrade bundle needs a `oc adm upgrade create
bundle` tool to create it.

1. The technician that performs the upgrade needs documentation explaining how
to use the upgrade bundle.

#### Don't use the `Always` pull policy during the upgrade

Some OCP core components currently use the `Always` image pull policy during the
upgrade. As a result, the kubelet and CRI-O will try to contact the registry
server, even if the image is already available in the local storage of the
cluster. This blocks the upgrade.

The catalog operator uses the `Always` pull policy to pull catalog images. It
does so in order refresh catalog images that are specified with a tag. But it
also does it when it pulls catalog images that are specified with a digest. That
should be changed to use the `IfNotPresent` pull policy for catalog images that

> are specified by digest.

Reviewer 2: @donpenney that's what you mentioned, right?

Reviewer 16: No, I was referring to MCO's behaviour during an upgrade. The MCO has (or had) code that runs during the upgrade that is pulling manifests from the image registry, regardless of whether the image is available locally. It looks like @cgwalters has now removed this code in 4.14, so that wouldn't be an issue moving forward:
https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/commit/85b297c1a063a7e130e82afb2fd2230ffd5c5fcc

Reviewer 7: There's still more registry fetching code that needs to be removed, see https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/pull/3821

Reviewer 4: I agree. If we want to limit this enhancement in scope, it should cover how we upgrade the cluster without registry, rather than how we operate OCP without a registry.

Author: That depends on the approach that was used to install the cluster. In the appliance approach there is no netboot, but a recovery partition and boot entry that the customer can use to completely reinstall the cluster. That recovery partition is preloaded before the cluster is shipped to the site. But if a drive fails it usually means that the complete node failed (and even the complete cluster, if it is multi-node). In that case the customer either replaces the drive with a new one (containing that recovery partition, like the original) or else replaces the complete cluster enclosure.

Most OCP core components have been changed in the past to avoid this use of the
`Always` pull policy. Recently the OVN pre-puller has also been changed (see
this [bug](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-13219) for details). To
prevent bugs like this happening in the future and make the solution less
fragile we should have a test that gates the OpenShift release and that
verifies that the upgrade can be performed without a registry server. One way
to ensure this is to run in CI an admission hook that rejects/warns about any spec

> that uses the `Always` pull policy.

Author: This is intended for our CI, to detect OCP components that are using the `Always` pull policy. Nothing would be rejected in actual customer clusters.

It would also be useful to have another test that scans for use of this `Always`
pull policy in the source code.

We can control the image pull policy for the OCP payload, but not for
customer-specific images. The OCP upgrade may succeed, but the overall upgrade
process will still be seen as failed from the customer point of view. To
prevent that the upgrade mechanism will verify that there are no existing pods

> with the `Always` pull policy, and will abort the upgrade if there are any.

Author: The OCP upgrade itself wouldn't be blocked because of failures to pull images for customer workloads. But to the customer the overall upgrade would have failed because her workloads are no longer working.

In the OpenShift appliance use case (which is where we started) both the cluster and the customer workloads are installed using a temporary registry server that is shutdown after the installation is complete. That assumption doesn't work in general. I will change this to a warning.

> with the `Always` pull policy, and will abort the upgrade if there are any.

Reviewer 15: > In the OpenShift appliance use case (which is where we started) both the cluster and the customer workloads are installed using a temporary registry server that is shutdown after the installation is complete. That assumption doesn't work in general. I will change this to a warning.

Can you call this detail out somewhere in the enhancement, it seems important and helps someone understand when they don't have all the context (me!)

> with the `Always` pull policy, and will abort the upgrade if there are any.

Author: Added that reference to this paragraph.

If there is enough space then the machine config operator will start a
temporary embedded image registry server in each node of the cluster, listening
in a randomly selected local port, and using a self signed certificate, to serve
the images from the `/var/lib/upgrade/4.13.17-x86_64` directory. It will then
configure the node to trust the self signed certificate and configure CRI-O to
use that temporary image registry server as a mirror for the pinned images,
creating a `/etc/containers/registries.conf.d/pin-upgrade.conf` file with a
content similar to this:

```toml
[[registry]]
prefix = "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release"
location = "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release"

[[registry.mirror]]
location = "localhost:12345/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release"

[[registry]]
prefix = "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev"
location = "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev"

[[registry.mirror]]
location = "localhost:12345/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev"
```

The machine config operator will copy the images to the
`/var/lib/containers/storage` directory. To do that it will use the gRPC API of

> CRI-O to run the equivalent of `crictl pull` for each of the images. When that

Reviewer 7: There's also `skopeo copy`.

Author: Yes, `skopeo copy` works fine as well, we used that in an earlier version of the prototype. I think using the CRI-O API is a bit better because it doesn't require launching the `skopeo copy` process multiple times.

is completed the machine config operator will update the new

> `status.pinnedImages` field of the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object:

Reviewer 7: Hmm.  This information duplicates that available in the containers/storage API basically.

And wait, there's only *one* `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object, but this information is effectively per-node right?

I don't think the CRC API object should have this type of status at all - effectively today the "node has reached desired state" including pinned images is covered by the rendered machineconfig.

Author: The intent here is to have in `status.pinnedImages` the list of images that have been pre-loaded and pinned in *all* the nodes of the cluster. I agree it makes more sense to have this is part of the rendered machineconfig, I will change that.

```yaml
status:
  pinnedImages:
  - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...
  - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
  - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
  ...
```

We explored several alternatives for the format of the bundle, and using a dump

> of a registry server to be the best one.

Reviewer 7: Really?  There isn't "a" registry server, which specific registry server?  docker/distribution?

Did you investigate `oci` directories?

Author: Yes, I mean https://github.com/distribution/distribution, will update the comment.

I did try to use `oci` directories and archives. The problem I found is that the OCI format requires use of the `application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json` media type in manifests, but our images use `application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json`. That means that when the image is written in OCI format its manifest is different, and therefore the digest is different. The upgrade pulls images by digest, so these modified images don't work. There is a `--preserve-digest` option in `skopeo copy`, but I think it can't address this issue. To make this work we would have to change the digests in the release image and in all the other places where those digests are used.

A plain file copy is feasible only if the target directory is empty and nothing
is using it. That is why we are suggesting to add full support to the
additionalimagestores setting in storage.conf. If that was usable (via

> `ContainerRuntimeConfig`) then we could create such an additional directory, copy

Reviewer 7: I'm still a bit confused as to the need for `additionalImageStores` here...

kind: ClusterVersion
metadata:
  name: version
spec:
  desiredUpdate:
    bundle:
      enabled: true
      monitor: true
```

For situations where it isn't desirable to monitor device events, or it isn't
possible to plug the USB stick or any other kind of media, we will also add a
new `spec.desiredUpdate.bundle.file` field to explicitly indicate the location
of the bundle. When this is used the value will be directly copied to the
`status.desired.bundle.file` field, without creating the `bundle-monitor` daemon
set.

If the administrator wants to disable automatic detection of the upgrade bundle,
and wants to manually copy the file to one of the cluster nodes she will do
something like this:

```yaml
spec:
  desiredUpdate:
    bundle:
      enabled: true
      file: /root/upgrade-4.13.7-x86_64.tar
```

If the administrator wants to disable automatic detection, but wants to use a
USB stick anyhow he will do something like this:

```yaml
spec:
  desiredUpdate:
    bundle:
      enabled: true
      file: /dev/sdb
```

When the `status.desired.bundle.file` field is populated the cluster version
operator will start to replicate the bundle to the rest of the nodes of the

> cluster. To do so it will first disable auto-scaling to ensure that no new

Reviewer 7: Eek.  That sounds like an exciting new fragile cross-operator connection.

I think instead we could inhibit new nodes joining the cluster (as distinct from new machines).  That'd be part of https://github.com/openshift/cluster-machine-approver

But...do we really need this?  We already today inherently have a race between upgrades and scaleup.  In the MCO today we serve the latest config if at least one node has upgraded successfully.

Hmm...wouldn't a lot of the concerns here in general be obviated if in this scenario we defaulted to cross-node image fetching?  IOW if at least one node in the cluster (e.g. control plane) has an image and we're in an offline upgrade scenario, default to fetching from it.

I suspect (particularly for the daemonset container images) it'd really benefit us to do peer-to-peer fetches by default across the board.

Author: The intent here is to prevent addition of new nodes after the images have been replicated to all the nodes and before the upgrade is started. If that happened then those new nodes wouldn't have the images and wouldn't be able to upgrade.

nodes are added to the cluster while this process is in progress. Then it will
start a new `bundle-server` daemon set. Each of the pods in this daemon set
will check if the file specified in the `status.desired.bundle.file` field
exists and contains a valid bundle. If it does then it will serve it via HTTP
for the other nodes of the cluster. If it doesn't exist then it will do
nothing.

Simultaneously with the `bundle-server` daemon set the cluster version operator
will also start a new `bundle-extractor` batch job in each node of the cluster.
Each pod in these jobs will try to read the bundle from the location specified
in `status.desired.bundle.file` field. If that file doesn't exist it will try

> to download it from the HTTP server of one of the pods of the `bundle-server`

Reviewer 7: Downloading a single 32G file over HTTP is going to be really fragile...I think we should really be moving more in the direction of transient registry servers and peer-to-peer fetches.

Author: It is 16 GiB if we use a dump of a docker/distribution registry server as we suggest. But I agree it is fragile. Actually initially I thought about using bittorrent, but had some difficulties to set it up in the prototype. If that worked it would be better for reliability and performance for large clusters. There won't be much difference for small clusters. Is that peer-to-peer fetches feature a reality? Is someone working on it already? If it was it would certainly help here.

`metadata.json` file (will always be the first entry of the tarball) to check
that there is space in `/var/lib/upgrade` for the size indicated in the `size`
field. If there is not enough space then it will be reported as en error
condition in the `ClusterVersion` object and the upgrade process will be
aborted.

If the `spec.desiredUpdate.bundle.digest` field has been set set then the
`bundle-extractor` will calculate the digest of the bundle, and if it doesn't
match it will report it as an error condition in the `ClusterVersion` object and
the upgrade process will be aborted.

If there is enough space the `bundle-extractor` will extract the contents of
the bundle to the `/var/lib/upgrade/4.13.7-x86_64` directory.

Once the digest has been verified and the bundle has been completely extracted
the `bundle-extractor` will update the status of the `ClusterVersion` object to
indicate that the bundle is extracted in that node. This will be done via a new
`status.desired.bundle.nodes.*.extracted` and
`status.seried.bundle.nodes.*.metadata` fields. For example, when `node0` and
`node2` have completed the extraction of the bundle but `node1` hasn't, the

> `ClusterVersion` status will look like this:

Reviewer 7: I think there's some overlap here between CVO status of the daemonset and MCO status of the rollout of the pinned images.

If we can just have the CVO monitor rollout of the machineconfig including the pinned images, that sounds way simpler.

Author: I think this information is still needed. We need to know the image digests in order to write them to the `pinnedImages`  field of the  `ContainerRuntimeConfig`, to request pre-loading and pinning of the images. That is  before MCO gets into the picture.

We also need the `metadata.release` field in order to trigger the upgrade.

An alternative to this would be to teach CVO to inspect the release image and extract the payload digests from it directly. Maybe it is already doing it? But that would need to be done in two steps: first pre-load and pin the release image, and then run the equivalent of `oc adm release info` but in a way that doesn't need to contact the registry server.

Reviewer 7: One problem with going through the CVO is that there are some *large* containers in the payload and we effectively rely on things only being fetched dynamically.

```yaml
status:
  desired:
    bundle:
      monitor: true
      file: /dev/sdb
      nodes:
        node0:
          extracted: true
          metadata: |
            {
              "version": "4.13.7",
              "arch": "x86_64",
              "release": "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...",
              "images": [
                "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
                "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
                ...
              ]
            }
        node1:
          extracted: false
        node2:
          extracted: true
          metadata: |
            {
              "version": "4.13.7",
              "arch": "x86_64",
              "size": "16 GiB",
              "release": "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...",
              "images": [
                "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
                "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
                ...
              ]
            }
```

At that point the `bundle-extractor` job will finish.

> The `extracted` field for each node will indicate if the bundle extraction

Author: ACK, will do that.

process has been completed.

The `metadata` field for each node will contain the information from the
`metadata.json` file of the bundle. Note that the list of images may be too long
(approximately 180 images) to store it in the status of the `ClusterVersion`
object; it may be convenient to store them in separate configmaps, and have only
the references to those configmaps in the `ClusterVersion` status.

When all the nodes have the bundle extracted (the `extracted` field for all
nodes is `true`) the cluster version operator will delete the `bundle-server`
daemon set and verify that the metadata in all nodes (the content of the
`metadata` field) is the same. If there are differences they will be reported as
error conditions in the status of the `ClusterVersion` object and the upgrade
process will be aborted. This is intended to prevent accidents like having two

> different USB sticks with different bundles plugged in two different nodes.

Author: Yes, but that checksum is optional.

> different USB sticks with different bundles plugged in two different nodes.

Reviewer 15: Why provide multiple solutions to the same problem?

> different USB sticks with different bundles plugged in two different nodes.

Reviewer 15: Right, so, the intention is that if the user hasn't set the digest deliberately, each node checks in with the digest of the bundle it has, and, if any of those differ, the entire cluster upgrade stops?

It would be worth providing an example of how the user would observe this error and from that how they would understand the fixes required

Once the metadata has been validated the cluster version operator will ask the
machine config operator to pin and pre-load the images specified in the
metadata. To do so it will use the new `pinnedImages` and `imagesDirectory`
fields of the `ContainerRuntimeConfig` object:

```yaml
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: ContainerRuntimeConfig
metadata:
  name: pin-upgrade
spec:
  containerRuntimeConfig:
    pinnedImages:
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    - quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...
    imagesDirectory: /var/lib/upgrade/4.13.7-x86_64
```

The machine config operator will react to that pinning and pre-loading the
images in all the nodes of the cluster, as described in the previous section.

When the all the images are pinned and pre-loaded the cluster version operator

> will check the `spec.desiredUpdate.hold` field of the `ClusterVersion` object.

Author: ACK, will replace booleans with enums.

There are some users that want to download the images in advance, during a period of time where the network isn't in use for other purposes, and then apply the upgrade later. Note that is for the case where no bundle is used, only pre-load and pinning of the images is desired.

    "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-v4.0-art-dev@sha256:...",
    ...
  ]
}
```

The `metadata.json` file will always be the first entry of the tar file, to
simplify operations that need the metadata but not the rest of the contents of
the tar file.

The command will also write a `upgrade-4.13.7-x86_64.sha256` file containing a
digest of the complete tar file. This digest is intended to protect the
integrity of the bundle. It can be checked with tools like `sha256sum`. It will
also be optionally used by the administrator of the cluster to ensure that the
right bundle is used in the right cluster. To do so the administrator of the
cluster will write it to the `desiredUpdate.bundle.digest` field of the
`ClusterVersion` object. The cluster version operator will reject the bundle if
it doesn't match this digest.

The engineer will write the tar file to some kind of media and hand it over to
the technicians, together with the documentation explaining how to use it.

#### Documentation to use the bundle

This documentation shouldn't assume previous OpenShift knowledge, and should be
basic instructions to plug the USB stick containing the bundle and then check if

> upgrade the upgrade succeeded or failed.

Reviewer 15: Can you make sure that's explained here, I think it's an important context point

> upgrade the upgrade succeeded or failed.

Author: Added that.

### Risks and Mitigations

The proposed solution will require space to store the release bundle and all the
release images in all the nodes of the cluster, approximately 48 GiB in the
worst case. To mitigate that risks the components that will consume disk space
will check in advance if the required space is available.

### Drawbacks

This approach requires non trivial changes to the cluster version operator and,
to a lesser degree, to the machine config operator.

## Design Details

### Open Questions

None.

### Test Plan

We should have at least tests that verifies that the upgrade can be performed in
a fully disconnected environment, both for a single node cluster and a cluster
with multiple nodes. These tests should gate the OCP release.

It is desirable to have another test that scans the OCP components looking for
use of the `Always` pull policy. This should probably run for each pull request
of each OCP component, and prevent merging if it detects that the offending pull

> policy is used. We should consider adding admission in CI for this.

Reviewer 7: IIRC, the use case for `Always` is that it forces a check for whether the image (even if present) is accessible by the pod's service account.  Which is important if any secret/proprietary images are possibly present on the node.

But we don't have that problem for images we ship.

(Hmm, offhand I think to implement this check in CI we'd need to gather all the images in the payload, and then look for pods referencing them and look at their pull policy; and this probably generalizes to OLM too)

> policy is used. We should consider adding admission in CI for this.

Author: I'd say it would reduce the probability of errors, which is probably good enough. It won't probably catch all cases, as some operators may have conditional code to select the pull policy. That is where scanning the source code helps: it may detect other potential errors, thus reducing the probability even more.

### Graduation Criteria

> The feature will ideally be introduced as `Dev Preview` in OpenShift 4.14.z,

Reviewer 7: I'd say let's avoid specifying exact OCP targets in enhancements as that is probably best suited to JIRA.

> The feature will ideally be introduced as `Dev Preview` in OpenShift 4.14.z,

Author: We wanted to have this in 4.14, that is what I meant by 4.14.z. 4.14.0 would be nice, but probably not realistic. @oourfali can you elaborate on the business requirements?

I also wanted to stress here that we would like to implement this in a phased approach, where first we implement only the pre-loading and pinning of the images for single-node clusters, and later we add the support for bundles and multi-node clusters.

I will update this to say `4.X`, `4.X+1`, `4.X+2`, etc.

> The feature will ideally be introduced as `Dev Preview` in OpenShift 4.14.z,

Reviewer 15: SGTM, and yep, I think the 4.14 ship has sailed

- Availability of the tests that verify the upgrade if single-node clusters.

- Availability of the tests that verify that no OCP component uses the `Always`
pull policy.

- Obtain positive feedback from at least one customer.

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- Ability to upgrade single-node and multi-node clusters using the
`bundle.enable` set to `true` or `false`: with a bundle or just pinning and
pre-loading the images.

- Ability to create bundles using the `oc adm upgrade create bundle` command.

- Availability of the tests that verify the upgrade in single-node and
multi-node clusters.

- User facing documentation created in
[https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs](openshift-docs).

#### Removing a deprecated feature

Not applicable, no feature will be removed.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

There are no additional considerations for upgrade or downgrade. The same
considerations that apply to the cluster version operator in general will also
apply in this case.

### Version Skew Strategy

This feature will only be usable once the cluster version operator and the
machine config operator have been upgraded to support it. That upgrade will have

> to be done by other means.

Reviewer 15: So if I'm in a disconnected environment right now, how do I upgrade? Why is this not sufficient for the long term?

Author: My understanding is that currently the only supported way to upgrade in a disconnected environment is to use a registry mirror. The upgrade that brings the new capability will have to be done using that registry mirror, or else re-installing the cluster.

Reviewer 15: Can you make sure this is mentioned somewhere, it would be good to understand why this new solution is better than the existing/old solution but I don't think it's mentioned anywhere yet so is hard to compare

Author: This solution is not in general better than the current one. It is better specifically for disconnected clusters where it isn't possible or desirable to bring up an external mirror registry. The "Alternatives" section explains that. Does it seem enough or should we expand it?

Reviewer 15: I think it would be good to update the alternatives to explain that the alternatives mentioned there are the currently supported solutions, so, the alternative effectively is do nothing and maintain the status quo. It wasn't obvious that those alternatives were the current solution

Author: I tried to clarify that in the alternatives section.

For subsequent upgrades we will ensure that the cluster version operator can
work with both the old and the new version of the machine config operator.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

Not applicable, there are no API extensions.

#### Failure Modes

#### Support Procedures

## Implementation History

There is an initial prototype exploring some of the implementation details
described here in this [https://github.com/jhernand/upgrade-tool](repository).

## Alternatives

The alternative to this is to make a registry server available, either outside
or inside the cluster.

An external registry server is a well known solution, even for disconnected

> environments, but it is not feasible in most of the target environments.

Reviewer 15: Why not? Where did this statement come from?

Author: Added a link to the motivation section.

An internal registry server, running in the cluster itself, is a feasible

> alternative for nodes with multiple clusters. The registry server supported by

Author: Indeed, thanks @cgwalters, donw.

Red Hat is Quay. The disadvantages of Quay is that it requires additional

> resources that are often not available in the target environments.

Reviewer 7: I am pretty sure we can figure out how to run a lightweight (readonly!) registry server as an implementation detail of this.

Author: That is what we do in the prototype: https://github.com/jhernand/upgrade-tool/blob/main/internal/registry.go. But it only runs while copying the images to the containers storage directory.

For single node clusters an internal registry server isn't an alternative

> because it would need to be continuously available during and after the upgrade,

Author: Take into account that for single-node clusters this registry needs to be running very early. Not sure if a workload managed by the cluster itself will work. An systemd service will certainly work; that is what we use for the installation of the OpenShift appliance. The question is then if we want to support that new piece of software. For the installation it is OK because it only runs once, during the installation. But for upgrades it would need to be a new component that needs itself to be patched and upgraded.

> because it would need to be continuously available during and after the upgrade,

Reviewer 7: We have other containers executed via systemd+podman for the "on prem" cluster types; they're still "managed" though because we generate those systemd units (which fetch via digest) via machineconfig.

> because it would need to be continuously available during and after the upgrade,

Author: That is, more or less, the approach that is used for installation in the appliance: a systemd service (created via ignition) that uses podman to run a docker/distribution registry to serve images from a dedicated data partition. But we shut it down after installation, because we don't want to patch and upgrade it. If having this piece of software in every cluster (maybe down, and automatically activated when required via systemd) then it would help. But this new service would need to be owned and maintained by the OCP team. Does that sound reasonable?

> and that isn't possible if the registry server runs in the cluster itself.

Author: That is correct. Actually I think it could be possible to run that temporary registry server without even extracting the bundle contents from the tar archive. We could create a [storage driver](https://github.com/distribution/distribution/blob/main/registry/storage/driver/storagedriver.go) that calculates the offsets of files inside the tar archive and serves them directly, without ever extracting it.
